# Sharing and reusing data
## 2. Workshops
- Today we're talking about topics related to sharing and preserve data.

We'll discuss:

1. Sharing and reusing data generally
2. File formats and metadata for long-term storage and making data findable
3. Using data repositories to make data publically accessible and preserve data files


## 3. Introduction
First, we'll focus on considerations for:

- Sharing your data with external researchers, and perhaps openly.
- Reusing data made available by others.

## 4. Why share data
Reasons that drive researchers and may influence you to share data 

- Required by federal funding agencies
	- NIH, NSF
- Required by publishers 
	- Cell, Nature, Science
- Allows data to be used to answer new questions.
	- Data may be put to use or combined in novel ways by other researchers.
	- You may not anticipate how data can be useful.
- Makes research more transparent.
	- The evidence you used is available to review.
- Makes your papers more useful and citable by other researchers.
	- pubs with data make clear, what you did and how you used your evidence are clear.
	- Can give more weight to your arguments.
	- Showing good work with data can improve your reputation as a researcher.
- Get credit for your work
	- Data are increasingly becoming a citable research product in and of themselves

## 5. How data are shared
Traditionally:

- Sharing one on one
- Sharing as part of a small lab team
- Sharing between faculty and students
- Sharing a few compiled results (tables, diagrams) within the context of a publication

More recently:

- Sharing with large numbers of researchers outside a research team
- Sharing data as a distinct entity
	 - Not as a supplement to a paper
- Broad dissemination online
- Sharing with the public

## 6. Common approaches
- There are several ways to share research data. 
- The appropriate method will depend on the nature of your research and data.

- Informal sharing: provide access to or send research data upon request
	- Email to individual requesters
	- Send using FileX
	- Post online via a project or personal web site
- Supplemental information: provide research data in support of published articles
	Submit as supplemental material to be hosted on a journal publisher's website
	
First options are valid ways to share data, a repository is better able to provide long-term access and digital preservation. 
We'll discuss different types of respositories a little more later.

- Institutional repository: deposit research data in local repository
- Disciplinary data repository: deposit research data in an appropriate community-based repository

### Data papers
Data deposited in a repository can also be supplemented with a "data paper"

- A newer type of publication that describes a dataset, but does not analyze it or draw any conclusions

Example: Nature publishes a journal called Scientific Data:

- Scientific Data is a peer-reviewed, open-access journal 
- for descriptions of scientifically valuable datasets, and 
- research that advances the sharing and reuse of scientific data.

## 7. Federal funding agencies
### Discussion
Are you familiar with changes to federal funding policies?

In the U.S.this is where the big driver for new standards and tools for data sharing.
### New requirements
In May 2013 President Barack Obama signed an Executive Order requiring that:

- data generated by the government be made available in open, machine-readable formats, 
- with safegaurds for privacy, confidentiality, and security.

This was followed by the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy. 
They issued a directive in support of open access to research.

Requires that federal funding agencies:

- With more than $100M in expenditures
- Develop plans to make the published results of federally funded research freely available to the public 
- This is within one year of publication 
- and requiring researchers to better account for and manage digital data resulting from funded research. 

These requirements are new and still developing

Researchers need to submit DMPs with grants to explain:

- How they will manage their research data during a project.
- How they will share and preserve their data after their project.
  
### SPARC policy tracking tool
SPARC policy tracking [Website](http://researchsharing.sparcopen.org/)

Maintains explanations of current article and data sharing requirements for federal agencies.

## 8. Which data to share
You may have separate requirements and restrictions from different stakeholders when it comes to sharing research data.

- Funding agencies, 
- Publishers and 
- Institutions 

As we've mentioned several times, your data may be subject to legal and ethical restrictions.

This applies not only to storage and security, but also 

- the the manner in which you share data and
- which data you may share

### Copyrights
Be aware of copyrights and whether you have the right to share the data.

If and when you share data you will need to include copyright information with the data.

Maintain rights documentation for data and materials you use whether:

- You created them and are the rights holder
- Someone else holds the rights

This should include: 

1. Author/creator; 
2. Dates of creation or publication; and 
3. Any permissions you have or know of regarding the information.
	- Do you have permission or a contract from someone to use data in a certain way? Keep that.

### Patents
- Patents provide strong rights to the patent-holder against any unlicensed use of a patented invention.  
- Patents can cover intangible inventions
	 -  Such as algorithms  
- If your project might include the dissemination patented inventions 
	- such as software using patented algorithms, 
	- or products such as organisms embodying constructed DNA
- Then investigate the available exceptions for research use
	- and the licensing available to share for research purposes.

### NDAs and licenses, and use agreements
Contracts and licenses can shape specific relationships 
and determine permissions to use and disseminate information.  

If you have access to information through:

- a licensing arrangement, 
- or an individually negotiated and signed agreement 
	- Such as a "non-disclosure agreement" 
	- or a "confidentiality agreement" 

You are bound to the terms of those agreements.  

Therefore it is important that you consider the future uses you may wish to make of data, such as sharing, and negotiate for those rights 
When entering a licensing agreement or contract.

### Subject-rights
In the United States, privacy laws are "patchwork".
If you work with personally-identifiable information about individuals, 
then you should apprise yourself of federal and state laws.  

Prioritize this issue especially if you work with 

- financial, 
- medical information, or 
- information about children.

Subjects have the right to privacy and to avoid damage to their reputation. 

You may still be able to share

- Some data publically 
	- Perhaps cleaned and without sensitive information,
	- or aggregated data
- Complete data with restrict access to researchers who meet specific conditions/training
	- This also may require subjects to consent for you to share data for research purposes.

### Juristiction-specific rules
Every country has its own rules that govern particular types of content.  
In the United States:

- Export-control rules may still apply to:
	- cryptographic research 
	- or other types of information affecting national security, 
- Both state and federal laws may also restrict particular subjects

You should be broadly familiar with whether your kinds of content might be regulated. 
In particular pay attention to rules for jurisdictions you are

- working in, 
- sourcing information from,
- or disseminating information to. 

## 9. Sharing Outside of team
Consult:
 your university data policy/intellectual property policy
 funders’ policies
 your PI
 your IRB office

- Be aware of patient confidentiality– does the data set need to be anonymized?
- Beware data ownership--do you have the right to share these data?
- Timing: At which point do you share data? 
	- Embargo? 
	- What is your purpose for sharing data?  
	- Do you share raw data or analyzed data?  
	- Should data be “peer reviewed”?  

## 10. Reusing data
### Asking
When making a request to use another’s data, be specific. 

- Are you looking for an entire data set that includes multiple variables or are you looking for a subset of this data? 
- Are you looking for data from a specific time frame, in a specific geographic area? 
- Knowing and communicating to the data creator what the “boundaries” are of the data and how you cna use them.

### licenses and use agreements
- If data are publically shared, they will often have licenses or use agreements specified in the metadata. 
- It is important to follow these instructions if you decide to use the data.

Here is an example of a common type of license.
This is a Creative Commons license.
Specifically, it is a Creative Commons license saying
Anyone has right to freely:

- Distribute,
- Tweek,
- Remix
- and even use commercially

The content it is attached to.
It's called a CC-BY license.

There are more restrictive licenses.
Generally, licenses are easier to use than writing a data use agreement.
They have prewritten language indicating 

- which rights the rights holder grants to users
- and what conditions there are for use.

To use a license, you would attach it to the object when it is published. 
We will talk more about this with data respositories.

## 11. Data citation
Citing data is important in order to:

- Give the data producer appropriate credit
- Allow easier access to the data for re-purposing or re-use
- Enable readers to verify your results

Citation Elements

- A dataset should be cited formally in an article's reference list, not just informally in the text. 
- Many data repositories and publishers provide explicit instructions for citing their contents. 
- If no citation information is provided, you can still construct a citation following generally agreed-upon guidelines from sources such as 
- the Force 11 Joint Declaration of Data Citation Principles and the current DataCite Metadata Schema.

## 12. 5 core elements
There are 5 core elements usually included in a dataset citation, with additional elements added as appropriate.

- Creator(s) – may be individuals or organizations
	- Creator names in non-Roman scripts should be transliterated using the ALA-LC Romanization Tables.
- Title
- Publication year when the dataset was released (may be different from the Access date)
- Publisher – the data center, archive, or repository
- Identifier – a unique public identifier (e.g., an ARK or DOI)

### Common additional elements
Core elements are sufficient in the simplest case, citing a complete static dataset 

Additional elements may be needed if you wish to cite 

- A dynamic (changing) dataset 
- or a subset of a larger dataset. 

These include: 

- Version of the dataset you analyzed.
- Date when the data was accessed.
- Subset of the dataset analyzed 
	- a range of dates 
	- a range of records/observations
	- a list of variables used

### Example citations
“OECD (2008), Social Expenditures aggregates, OECD Social Expenditure Statistics (database). http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/000530172303 (Accessed on 2008-12-02).”t44q88124

## Conclusion
Discussed data sharing and requirements to consider
Reviewed Data citation

## References
- Open Science Training Handbook [Website](https://open-science-training-handbook.gitbooks.io/book/content/02OpenScienceBasics/06OpenLicensingAndFileFormats.html)
- Ball, Alex and Monica Duke. "How to Cite Datasets and Link to Publications" [PDF](http://www.dcc.ac.uk/resources/how-guides/cite-datasets)
- Coursera. https://www.coursera.org/learn/data-visualization/lecture/7yx2o/video-lesson-what-do-we-mean-by-data
- Stanford University Libraries. "Licensing" [Website](http://library.stanford.edu/research/data-management-services/share-and-preserve-research-data/licensing)
### Publisher requirements

New requirements

Requiring the data supporting published articles to be open is in the interest of publishers to preserve the integrity of the publication as well as the public good; however the logistics of sharing data can be more complicated. The Journal Data Archiving Policy (see JDAP, http://datadryad.org/pages/jdap) was created to provide a standard policy for journals to adopt


<!-- ## Open data movement

Panton principles https://pantonprinciples.org 
There are four Panton Principles, and they prescribe ways for making the data underlying published science open.  
The rapidly evolving open data movement has attracted a growing number of advocates, supporters, and practitioners, 
and has made a significant impact on government policy. 
Prior to the recent release of these federal policies, 
many research funders stopped short of requiring that research data be made openly accessible. 
These funders simply asked researchers that their “data be made available upon request.” 
This requisite has given researchers more control over who accesses their data. 
In theory this requisite should have prompted researchers to ensure that their data remain available long into the future. 
However, most researchers have ultimately failed to comply with these requirements.  
With the recent government mandates for open access to publically funded data, agencies are developing stronger policies for data management and sharing. 
Making data accessible by depositing it in an open access repository (institutional, or otherwise) 
actually minimizes the burden on the researcher in the long run and ensures compliance. 

Many publisher also have policies for sharing data. Some have adopted:
Journal Data Archiving Policy (see JDAP, http://datadryad.org/pages/jdap) 
Authors publishing in a journal that has adopted the JDAP policy or a similar standard will be required to supply a persistent link to the data in an appropriate archive as part of the article submission process. 
-->
