# Data visualization

Does the visualization add value? In most cases a visualization must achieve both audience engagement and knowledge value to add real value. One or the other is insufficient to make it an effective communications tool.
True to the data: It is a trite observation that statistics can be made to tell any story, and that is particularly true for visualization as well. Because almost all visualizations summarize information, the lines along which data is summarized can change the take-away. Visualizations are often also a form of over-simplification of a complex set of data, or set of ideas. What the creator chooses to include and to leave out will change the story, and considering in advance the potential consequences of certain choices is key to creating and effectively using visualization to tell a story. To avoid letting audience members misinterpret, misuse and misunderstand a visualization, consider the following:
i.                    Format and setting: Is it a presentation, a website, a poster, a newsletter or something else? During a presentation a visualization need not stand on its own - the creator or someone else familiar with the contents will provide the audience with guidance as to how it should (and ideally how it should not) be read. While a poster may have a presenter, it will eventually need to stand on its own: in that case, there are more stringent requirements on labeling and explanation (never assume that a visualization is self-explanatory).
ii.                   Accuracy: The accuracy of the information presented is of course similarly important. However, accuracy is occasionally a trade-off with readability or even legibility. Perhaps it is necessary to remove outliers to make the visualization meaningful. Decisions to remove or transform information should be made very carefully, and always while cognizant of whether it increases the likelihood that the audience can misinterpret, misuse or misunderstand it.
iii.                 Communicating the limitations: It is important that the visualization or its accompanying information reflect any limitations. The quality and limitations of data as discussed in section one of this paper should be made obvious. When the limitations are not clear, the creator of the visualization actually runs the risk of “laundering” bad information. While the creator may be aware of the limitations, and believes that the data can support the claims made, it does not prevent the audience from drawing conclusions from the visualization that are not substantiated by the data, unless the limitations are clearly communicated. In such a case, the audience can cite the creator of the visualization as evidence, without citing the underlying data. This is similar to the insight that quality control and source evaluation of data collected from different sources, should not rely on the compiler as the source, but instead the individual sources of the data, as discussed in section one.
iv.                 Audience: Understanding the intended audience is central to making choices in the categories above: an expert audience probably does not need as much guidance and information about limitations as a lay-person, for example. Labels should also be different: experts will understand jargon, which can be more accurate than non-jargon. With a lay audience, however, it may be worth giving up accuracy to make the visualization more effective.
v.                   The afterlife: Keep in mind whether or not the use of the visualization (or any other piece of communication) could expand beyond the intended audience. Many visualizations are shared or made available in one form or another, to the audience. A good rule of thumb is to assume that anything shared on the web, intranet, at conferences, in publications or otherwise accessible by others will inevitably reach an audience different from the intended audience. In that case, any of the categories above become increasingly difficult to fulfil and weight against one another.  
 
Should the visualization be used: Ultimately, it is thus insufficient to decide on using visualization simply based on whether it adds value or not, because there are several ways in which it could do more harm than good. Could the visualization have unintended consequences? Could it be misleading, or lead to misuse or misunderstandings? The power that a creator of visualizations has to shape and interpret data and information is enormous, but with that power also comes with a significant responsibility to ensure good stewardship of the information. Considering the best practices discussed in this paper is a good start, but it is ultimately up to the discretion of creators.  


abela-2009-chart_suggestions-workflow