# Sharing and reusing data
- follow instructions
- Credit for work and incentives.
- Citation.
- Licensing

## 3. Introduction
Focus a little on:

- the considerations for sharing your data with researchers external to your group and perhaps openly 
- on and reusing data made available by others.

## 4. How data sharing has changed
In the past, traditionally:

- Sharing one on one
- Sharing as part of a small lab team
- Sharing between faculty and students
- Sharing a few compiled results (tables, diagrams) within the context of a publication

More recently:

- Sharing with large numbers of researchers outside a research team
- Sharing data as a distinct entity not as a supplement to a paper
- Broad dissemination via the internet 
- Sharing with the public


## 5. Why share data
Reasons that drive researchers and may influence you to share data 

- Required by publishers 
	- Cell, Nature, Science
- Required by federal funding agencies
	- NIH, NSF
- Allows data to be used to answer new questions.
	- Data may be put to unexpected uses or combines in novel ways by other researchers.
	- It's important to remember that you may not be able to anticipate how your data could be useful to others.
- Makes research more transparent.
	- What you did and the evidence you relied on, and how you used it are clear.
	- Can give more weight to your arguments.
- Makes your papers more useful and citable by other researchers.
	- Data is increasingly becoming a citable research product in and of itself
	- Showing that you've done a good job gathering and working with data can improv your reputation as a researcher.


## 6. Common approaches
- There are several ways to share research data. 
- The appropriate method will depend on the nature of your research and the content of the data

- Informal sharing: provide access to or send research data upon request
	- Email to individual requesters
	- Send using FileX
	- Post online via a project or personal web site
- Supplemental information: provide research data in support of published articles
	Submit as supplemental material to be hosted on a journal publisher's website
	
While the first three options above are valid ways to share data, a repository is much more able to provide long-term access. 

- Data deposited in a repository can be supplemented with a "data paper"
	- a relatively new type of publication that describes a dataset, but does not analyze it or draw any conclusions

We'll discuss different types of respositories a little more later.

- Institutional repository: deposit research data in local repository
- Disciplinary data repository: deposit research data in an appropriate community-based repository

## 7. Federal funding agencies
In May 2013 President Barack Obama signed an Executive Order requiring that:

“going forward, data generated by the government be made available in open, machine-readable formats, while appropriately safeguarding privacy, confidentiality, and security.”

This was followed by White House Office of Science and Technology Policy has issues a directive in support of open access to research requiring funding agencies:

“with more than $100M in R&D expenditures to develop plans to make the published results of federally funded research
freely available to the public within one year of publication and requiring researchers 
to better account for and manage the digital data resulting from federally funded scientific research.” 

- Funding agencies, 
- Publishers and 
- Institutions 

- May all have separate requirements and restrictions concerning the sharing of research data. 
- It is the responsibility of the researcher to comply with these.
  
These requirements are subject to change, and have been changing rapidly over the past decade.  

SPARC policy tracking: http://researchsharing.sparcopen.org/ 

- Maintains explanations of current article and data sharing requirements for federal agencies.

## 8. Which data to share
As we've mentioned several times, your data may be subject to legal and ethical restrictions.

This applies not only to storage and security, but also 

- the the manner in which you share data and
- which data you may share

### Copyrights
maintain rights documentation for data and materials you use even for works you yourself create and for which you are the copyright holder.  

This should include, at a minimum, 
(1) author/creator information; 
(2) dates of creation or publication; and 
(3) any permissions you have or know of regarding the information, 
	including general licensing (such as Creative Commons), 
	user-specific licensing (such as a signed contract between you and the rights holder), 
	or other legal authorizations.

If and when you share data you will need to include this information with the data.

### Patents
- Patents provide strong rights to the patent-holder against any non-permissive (unlicensed) use of the patented invention itself.  
- Patents can cover intangible inventions, such as algorithms or business methods.  
- In general, dissemination of information about the invention is not protected.  
- If your project includes the dissemination of actual patented inventions 
	- such as software embodying patented algorithms, 
	- or tangible products such as organisms embodying constructed DNA, 
- then you should investigate the exceptions available for research use, and the licensing available.

### Trade secrets, NDAs and licenses, and use agreements
While legislative rights such as copyright, patent, and form the background on which information is shared 
contracts and licenses shape numerous specific relationships.  

If you have access to information 

- through a licensing arrangement, 
- or an individually negotiated and signed agreement (such as a "non-disclosure agreement" or a "confidentiality agreement"), 

you are in most cases bound to the terms of those agreements.  

It is important, when acquiring access to information, that you consider the future uses you may wish to make of it
such as sharing, and negotiate for those rights. 

### Subject-rights
In the United States, privacy laws are wdescribed as a "patchwork", 
and if you work with personally-identifiable information about individuals, 
then you should apprise yourself of federal and state laws.  

Prioritize this issue especially if you work with 

- financial, 
- medical information, or 
- information about children.

Subjects have the right to privacy and to avoid damage to their reputation. 

You may still be able to share data some data or restrict access to other researchers with particular training, but this also may require subject consent.

### Juristiction-specific rules
Every country has its own rules that govern particular types of content.  
In the United States, the First Amendment is broadly protective of sharing information, but

- export-control rules may still apply to cryptographic research or other types of information affecting national security, 
- both state and federal laws may also restrict particular subjects

You should be broadly familiar with whether your kinds of content might be regulated anywhere, 
and in particular any rules for jurisdictions you are working in, sourcing information from, or disseminating information to. 

## 9. Sharing Outside of team
Consult:
 your university data policy/intellectual property policy
 funders’ policies
 your PI
 your IRB office

- Be aware of patient confidentiality– does the data set need to be anonymized?
- Beware data ownership--do you have the right to share these data?
- Timing: At which point do you share data? 
	- Embargo? 
	- What is your purpose for sharing data?  
	- Do you share raw data or analyzed data?  
	- Should data be “peer reviewed”?  

## 10. Reusing data
### Asking
When making a request to use another’s data, be specific. 

- Are you looking for an entire data set that includes multiple variables or are you looking for a subset of this data? 
- Are you looking for data from a specific time frame, in a specific geographic area? 
- Knowing and communicating to the data creator what the “boundaries” are of the data and how you cna use them.

### licenses and use agreements
- If data are publically shared, they will often have licenses or use agreements specified in the metadata. 
- It is important to follow these if you decide to use the data.

## 11. Data citation
Citing data is important in order to:

- Give the data producer appropriate credit
- Allow easier access to the data for re-purposing or re-use
- Enable readers to verify your results

Citation Elements

- A dataset should be cited formally in an article's reference list, not just informally in the text. 
- Many data repositories and publishers provide explicit instructions for citing their contents. 
- If no citation information is provided, you can still construct a citation following generally agreed-upon guidelines from sources such as 
- the Force 11 Joint Declaration of Data Citation Principles and the current DataCite Metadata Schema.

## 12. 5 core elements
There are 5 core elements usually included in a dataset citation, with additional elements added as appropriate.

- Creator(s) – may be individuals or organizations
	- Creator names in non-Roman scripts should be transliterated using the ALA-LC Romanization Tables.
- Title
- Publication year when the dataset was released (may be different from the Access date)
- Publisher – the data center, archive, or repository
- Identifier – a unique public identifier (e.g., an ARK or DOI)

### Common additional elements

- Although the core elements are sufficient in the simplest case
- citation to the entirety of a static dataset 
- additional elements may be needed if you wish to cite a dynamic dataset or a subset of a larger dataset. 

- Version of the dataset analyzed in the citing paper
- Access date when the data was accessed for analysis in the citing paper
- Subset of the dataset analyzed (e.g., a range of dates or record numbers, a list of variables)
- Verifier that the dataset or subset accessed by a reader is identical to the one analyzed by the author (e.g., a Checksum)
- Location of the dataset on the internet, needed if the identifier is not "actionable" (convertable to a web address)

### Example citations
“OECD (2008), Social Expenditures aggregates, OECD Social Expenditure Statistics (database). http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/000530172303 (Accessed on 2008-12-02).”t44q88124

## Conclusion
Discussed data sharing and requirements to consider
Reviewed Data citation

## References
- Ball, Alex and Monica Duke. "How to Cite Datasets and Link to Publications" [PDF](http://www.dcc.ac.uk/resources/how-guides/cite-datasets)
- Coursera. https://www.coursera.org/learn/data-visualization/lecture/7yx2o/video-lesson-what-do-we-mean-by-data

### Publisher requirements

New requirements

Requiring the data supporting published articles to be open is in the interest of publishers to preserve the integrity of the publication as well as the public good; however the logistics of sharing data can be more complicated. The Journal Data Archiving Policy (see JDAP, http://datadryad.org/pages/jdap) was created to provide a standard policy for journals to adopt


<!-- ## Open data movement

Panton principles https://pantonprinciples.org 
There are four Panton Principles, and they prescribe ways for making the data underlying published science open.  
The rapidly evolving open data movement has attracted a growing number of advocates, supporters, and practitioners, 
and has made a significant impact on government policy. 
Prior to the recent release of these federal policies, 
many research funders stopped short of requiring that research data be made openly accessible. 
These funders simply asked researchers that their “data be made available upon request.” 
This requisite has given researchers more control over who accesses their data. 
In theory this requisite should have prompted researchers to ensure that their data remain available long into the future. 
However, most researchers have ultimately failed to comply with these requirements.  
With the recent government mandates for open access to publically funded data, agencies are developing stronger policies for data management and sharing. 
Making data accessible by depositing it in an open access repository (institutional, or otherwise) 
actually minimizes the burden on the researcher in the long run and ensures compliance. 

Many publisher also have policies for sharing data. Some have adopted:
Journal Data Archiving Policy (see JDAP, http://datadryad.org/pages/jdap) 
Authors publishing in a journal that has adopted the JDAP policy or a similar standard will be required to supply a persistent link to the data in an appropriate archive as part of the article submission process. 
-->
